Add Top-level overview documentation (#314)
tenstorrent/tt-llk: docs/llk/l2/top_level_overview.md

# Getting started with Tensix Core and Low-level Kernels

## Introduction

Low-Level Kernels (LLKs) form the foundational layer in the Tenstorrent software stack. LLKs directly drive hardware to perform matrix and vector operations commonly seen in the field of machine learning. This document aims to provide an improved understanding of Tensix Core functions.

## Tensix Core

Tenstorrent chips consist of a matrix of Tensix Cores. Figure 1 represents the top level of the Tensix Core:

<p align="center">

>   <img src="docs/common/_static/tensix_core.png" alt="Top-level diagram of Tensix Core" width="600" /><br/>

Author: Getting fixed right away!

## Tensix Core

Tenstorrent chips are architected as a matrix of Tensix Cores. Figure 1 shows the top-level diagram of a Tensix Core:

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/tensix_core.png" alt="Top-level diagram of Tensix Core" width="600" /><br/>
  <em>Figure 1: Top-level diagram of Tensix Core</em>
</div>

Figure 1 consists of four major parts:

1. Internal SRAM (L1) Memory - Stores input/output tensors and program code for all RISC-V processors within the core;
2. Network-On-Chip (NoC) - Manages data movement between Tensix Cores and DRAM across the chip;
3. Five RISC-V Processors -
   * NCRISC and BRISC - Handle NOC communication for board setup;
   * TRISCs - Control the Tensix Engine through specialized Tensix instructions;
4. Tensix Engine - Hardware accelerator controlled by TRISC processors, optimized for matrix computations essential to AI/ML operations.

LLKs primarily operate by transferring data to and from L1 memory, and programming the Tensix Engine to perform various operations on the stored data.

## Tensix Engine

> The Tensix Engine is a multi-threaded, single-issue, in-order processor with a custom instruction set architecture (Tensix ISA). It operates with three concurrent threads, each controlled by a dedicated TRISC processor through its own instruction stream.

Reviewer: I see you have mentioned for multiple Tensix EXUs that they have a dedicated instruction set, so you could add a bit more information.  

through its own instruction stream --> this is not clear what do you mean by own, Tensix Engine, or the Trisc controlling it. YOu could say that the Tensix engine has a instruction set that is different from the RISCV instructions and these instructions can be issued to the Tensix engine from the RISCV cores to be executed by the Tenxis engine. 

A description here will remove some confusions later on.

Figure 2 represents a simplified top-level architecture of the Tensix Engine:
<div align="center">

>   <img src="images/tensix_engine.png" alt="Top-level architecture of Tensix Engine" width="500" /><br/>

Reviewer: no not needed, wanted to make sure

  <em>Figure 2: Top-level architecture of Tensix Engine</em>
</div>

Figure 3 illustrates the circular data flow within the Tensix Engine:
1. Input data arrives in L1 memory;
2. Data is unpacked into source registers;

> 3. FPU processes data from source registers;

Author: Yes - the document is aimed at engineers who are starting to get familiar with the LLKs - many details are left out for readability.

5. Processed data is packed and written back to L1 memory.

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/tensix_core_data_flow.png" alt="Top-level architecture of Tensix Engine" width="400" /><br/>
  <em>Figure 3: Data flow inside Tensix Core</em>
</div>

## Inputs

When describing input tensors, each individual element is referred to as a *datum*. Figure 4 shows an example of a 32x64 input tensor, where each square represents a single datum.

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/input_tensor_example.png" alt="An example of 32x64 input tensor" width="500" /><br/>
  <em>Figure 4: An example of 32x64 input tensor</em>
</div>

Input tensors can be stored in L1 memory using two formats:

1. Row-major order - Data is stored sequentially row by row, the conventional format for tensor storage;
2. Tile order - A specialized storage format optimized for Tensix operations.

Row-major order follows the standard linear memory layout, where elements are stored consecutively row by row regardless of tensor dimensions.

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/row_major_order.png" alt="Row-major order" width="500" /><br/>
  <em>Figure 5: Row-major order of input data</em>
</div>

> For optimal LLK performance, input data must be organized into 32x32 tiles. Each tile is further subdivided into four 16x16 faces (F0-F3). Within each face, data is stored in row-major order. LLKs handle the transformation of input data into tile order before performing computations.

Author: Rewrote this, please take another look when you find the time.

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/tile_order_example.png" alt="Tile order" width="500" /><br/>
  <em>Figure 6: Tile order of input data</em>
</div>

## Data formats

Input and output tensors support multiple storage formats, enabling developers to select the optimal precision for their application. The complete list of supported formats is available in [the official data format table](https://docs.tenstorrent.com/pybuda/latest/dataformats.html).

Important considerations:
- All formats can be stored in L1 memory;
- Only a subset of formats are supported during unpacking operations;
- Different components of the Tensix Core have varying format support.

> [Math fidelity](https://docs.tenstorrent.com/pybuda/latest/dataformats.html) is a key concept in achieving computational accuracy. Multiple multiplication phases may be required to reach full precision, depending on the data format used. Tensix Cores support up to four fidelity phases for all data formats, allowing developers to balance accuracy requirements with performance for their specific application

Author: Agreed, adding it right away

## Unpacker

The Unpacker is a DMA engine that transfers data between L1 memory and source operand registers. The Tensix architecture implements two unpackers:
- Unpacker 0: Connected to Source A register and Destination register
- Unpacker 1: Connected to Source B register

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/unpack_top_level.png" alt="Unpackers" width="400"/>
  <br/>
  <em>Figure 7: Unpackers</em>
</div>

> Unpackers feature hardware-accelerated data format conversion through specialized components called gaskets, eliminating software overhead. TRISC0 controls both unpackers through a dedicated instruction set.

Author: "TRISC0 manages both unpackers through a subset of the Tensix instruction set." 
I guess this sounds alright? Please let me know when you take a second look

## Source Operand Register files (Source A and Source B)

Source registers are two-dimensional structures designed to hold one tile of data each. Key characteristics:

- Store unpacked data from their respective unpackers;
- Implement double-buffering to maintain high throughput;
- Support pipelined execution through parallel buffer access.

## Floating Point Unit (FPU)

The Floating Point Unit (FPU) serves as the primary computational engine within the Tensix Core, executing the majority of mathematical operations.

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/fpu_cell.png" alt="FPU" width="400" /><br/>
  <em>Figure 8: Floating Point Unit</em>
</div>

The FPU operates on data from Source A and Source B registers, storing results in the Destination register. It is architected as a matrix of FPU cells - multifunctional units that combine multipliers and adders, working with accumulators in the Destination register.
Each FPU cell supports three operations:

1. Accumulated dot product
2. Accumulated element-wise addition
3. Element-wise addition

> The FPU is controlled through a dedicated set of Tensix instructions issued by TRISC1.

Reviewer: Referring to the comment above regarding Tensix Engine instructions. The text can be more cohesive.

## Special FPU (SFPU)

> SFPU provides specialized operations beyond FPU capabilities. As a SIMD engine, it executes identical operations on multiple data points in parallel. The Compute SFPU supports:

Reviewer: The Compute SFPU ---> What is the purpose of using the word Compute here ?

> - 32-bit input calculations

Reviewer: If you refer to 32 bit ability here, I think it is better to  specify that the FPU can do calculations in upto 19 bits or that src registers can hold data upto 19 bits whereas DEST can hold upto 32 bits somewhere above.  Now that I think of it, there seems to be no section for dest registers

Author: Agreed, added that it is up to 19 bits in current architecture

- Complex mathematical functions (sigmoid, exponential, reciprocal, etc.)

SFPU data flow requirements:

> - Input operands must reside in the Destination register;

Reviewer: Instead of introducing this suddenly here, in the first line of SFPU definition you could add, unlike the FPU, the SFPU can only read from and write to Destination register.

- Data can be moved to Destination register through:
  - FPU transfer from Source A/B registers;
  - Direct unpacking from L1 memory via Unpacker 0;
- Results are stored back in the Destination register.

SFPU is instantiated within FPU, meaning that the same processors used for issuing FPU instructions (TRISC1) should be in charge of issuing SFPU instructions.

## Packer

> The Packer is a DMA engine that transfers data from the Destination register to L1 memory. Like the Unpackers, it implements hardware-accelerated data conversion through gaskets. TRISC2 controls the Packer through its dedicated instruction set.

Reviewer: I had a look at L1 documentation, it seems it did not properly call out TRISC0 TRISC1 or TRISC2. It mainly called them RISCV. 0, RISC V1  etc. If you are going to use TRISC* then it is better to add more text or intro in that doc. Or at the start of L2 doc, you could say out of the 5 RISCVs 3 are dedicated ........

Author: In the chapter regarding Tensix Core, we do say "Five RISCV processors" and proceed to elaborate more on that - do you think it's sufficient? Let's also hear @ncvetkovicTT's opinion on this as the author of L1.

Reviewer 2: I agree with both, Pavle does mention the names of the RISCs at the start of the document. Maybe we can change [this sentence](https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-llk/pull/314/files/bc9e61b8c2ee80425991713c9a9cc3c8baa6073f#diff-c8575a0577b66b4d91eccc9d7ac0d70836aa03a6af89c74509d611d5bbf13bf5:~:text=*%20TRISCs%20%2D%20Control%20the%20Tensix%20Engine%20through%20specialized%20Tensix) to say:

`Three TRISCs - Control the Tensix Engine through specialized Tensix`

## Low Level Kernel Operations

LLK operations encapsulate the utilization of the previously described hardware blocks. These operations are categorized by their resource usage into three groups:

> 1. Unpack operations - Data movement from L1 to source registers

Reviewer: since the intro is over for every upnack operation you could write (destination registers) in parentheses

2. Math operations - Computational tasks using FPU/SFPU
3. Pack operations - Data movement from destination register to L1

### LLK Unpack Operations (Table 1)

Table 1 contains all unpack operations currently implemented for Tensix:

| LLK Header | Description |
|:-----------|:------------|
| `llk_unpack_A.h` | Unpacks a single tile from L1 into Source A register. Used for unary operations. |
| `llk_unpack_AB.h` | Unpacks two tiles from L1 into Source A and Source B registers. Used for binary operations. |

> | `llk_unpack_AB_matmul.h` | Optimizes matrix multiplication by unpacking tiles into Source A and B with register reuse. |

Reviewer: register reuse goes a bit more into depth at this point. Not sure the reader will understand it here. 
And also not sure the register reuse is done for Blackhole either.

Author: Do you think we should skip the "register reuse" portion to avoid confusion?

| `llk_unpack_reduce.h` | Unpacks a single tile into Source A and a scalar value into Source B for reduction operations. |
| `llk_unpack_tilize.h` | Converts row-major input data into tile format during unpacking. |
| `llk_unpack_untilize.h` | Converts tiled data back to row-major format during unpacking. |
---

### LLK Math Operations (Table 2)

Table 2 contains all math operations currently implemented for Tensix:

| LLK Header | Description |
|:-----------|:------------|
| `llk_math_eltwise_unary_datacopy.h` | Transfers a tile from Source A/B to Destination register using FPU. |
| `llk_math_eltwise_unary_sfpu.h` | Executes unary operations on a tile data in the Destination register using SFPU. |
| `llk_math_eltwise_binary.h` | Performs element-wise operations (add/sub/mul) on Source A and B tiles using FPU, storing results in Destination register. |

> | `llk_math_eltwise_reduce.h` | Computes global maximum or average from Source A using scalar values from Source B via FPU. |

Reviewer: scalar values or constant values. 

Although scalar is probably the more appropriate  word. For average reduction you probably can put vector values in Source B , But for this level it might be okay

# Getting started with Tensix Core and Low-level Kernels

## Introduction

Low-Level Kernels (LLKs) form the foundational layer in the Tenstorrent software stack. LLKs directly drive hardware to perform matrix and vector operations that are fundamental to machine learning computations. This document provides an overview of Tensix Core functions.

## Tensix Core

Tenstorrent chips are architected as a matrix of Tensix Cores. Figure 1 shows the top-level diagram of a Tensix Core:

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/tensix_core.png" alt="Top-level diagram of Tensix Core" width="600" /><br/>

>   <em>Figure 1: Top-level diagram of Tensix Core</em>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  <em>Figure 1: Top-level diagram of Tensix Core</em><br><br>
```
This adds a line break between the figure description and the rest of the text, improving readability. I'd add breaks to all figures except ones that immediately follow headings (i.e., figure 3 and figure 6) since the heading already provides sufficient spacing.

</div>

Figure 1 consists of four major parts:

1. Internal SRAM (L1) Memory - Stores input/output tensors and program code for all RISC-V processors within the core;

> 2. Network-On-Chip (NoC) - Manages data movement between Tensix Cores and DRAM across the chip;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Two Routers - Manage data movement between Tensix Cores and DRAM across the chip;
```

Row-major order follows the standard linear memory layout, where elements are stored sequentially row by row regardless of tensor dimensions.

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/row_major_order.png" alt="Row-major order" width="500" /><br/>
  <em>Figure 5: Row-major order of input data</em>
</div>

For optimal LLK performance, input data must be arranged in 32×32 tiles. Each tile is divided into four 16×16 sections called faces, labeled F0 to F3 in row-major order. Within each face, data is also stored in row-major order. LLKs handle the transformation of input data from its orginal data layout into tile order before performing computations.

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/tile_order_example.png" alt="Tile order" width="500" /><br/>
  <em>Figure 6: Input data in tile order</em>
</div>

## Data formats

Input and output tensors support multiple storage formats, enabling developers to select the optimal precision for their application. The complete list of supported formats is available in [the official data format table](https://docs.tenstorrent.com/pybuda/latest/dataformats.html).

Important considerations:
- All formats can be stored in L1 memory;

> - Only a subset of formats are supported during unpacking operations;

Author: Added it, removed the last bullet as this addition covers it.

- Unpacker 0: Connected to Source A register and Destination register
- Unpacker 1: Connected to Source B register

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/unpack_top_level.png" alt="Unpackers" width="400"/>
  <br/>
  <em>Figure 7: Unpackers</em>
</div>

Unpackers feature hardware-accelerated data format conversion through specialized components called gaskets, eliminating software overhead. TRISC0 controls both unpackers through a subset of the Tensix instruction set.

## Source Operand Register files (Source A and Source B)

Source registers are two-dimensional structures designed to hold one tile of data each. Key characteristics:

- Store unpacked data from their respective unpackers in limited accuracy (up to 19-bit data elements in current architectures);
- Implement double-buffering to maintain high throughput and support pipelined execution.

## Floating Point Unit (FPU)

The Floating Point Unit (FPU) serves as the primary computational engine within the Tensix Engine, executing the majority of mathematical operations.

<div align="center">

>   <img src="images/fpu_cell.png" alt="FPU" width="400" /><br/>

Reviewer 3: Good remark!

  <em>Figure 8: Floating Point Unit</em>
</div>

The FPU operates on data from Source A and Source B registers, storing results in the Destination register. It is architected as a matrix of FPU cells - multifunctional units that combine multipliers and adders, working with accumulators in the Destination register.
Each FPU cell supports four operations:

1. Accumulated dot product;
2. Accumulated element-wise addition;
3. Accumulated element-wise multiplication;
4. Element-wise addition.

The FPU is controlled through a dedicated set of Tensix instructions issued by TRISC1.

## Special FPU (SFPU)

> SFPU provides specialized operations beyond FPU capabilities. As a SIMD engine, it executes identical operations on multiple data points in parallel. Unlike FPU, SFPU can only read from and write to Destination register. SFPU supports:

Author: Reworded, please make sure to check out if it makes more sense now.

- 32-bit input calculations;
- Complex mathematical functions (sigmoid, exponential, reciprocal, etc.).

SFPU data flow requirements:

- Input operands must reside in the Destination register;
- Data can be moved to Destination register through:
  - FPU transfer from Source A/B registers;
  - Direct unpacking from L1 memory via Unpacker 0;
- Results are stored back in the Destination register.

> SFPU is instantiated within FPU, meaning that the same processors used for issuing FPU instructions (TRISC1) should be in charge of issuing SFPU instructions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SFPU is instantiated within FPU, meaning that the same processor used for issuing FPU instructions (TRISC1) is in charge of issuing SFPU instructions.
```

## Tensix Engine

> The Tensix Engine is a multi-threaded, single-issue, in-order processor that uses a custom instruction set architecture known as the Tensix ISA. It runs three concurrent threads, each managed by a dedicated TRISC processor. The Tensix ISA differs from the RISC-V instruction set; instructions are issued by RISC-V cores and then executed by the Tensix Engine.

Reviewer: It is run by three concurrent threads (it does not run the threads or manage the threads)

## Source Operand Register files (Source A and Source B)

Source registers are two-dimensional structures designed to hold one tile of data each. Key characteristics:

- Store unpacked data from their respective unpackers;
- Implement double-buffering to maintain high throughput;
- Support pipelined execution through parallel buffer access.

## Floating Point Unit (FPU)

The Floating Point Unit (FPU) serves as the primary computational engine within the Tensix Core, executing the majority of mathematical operations.

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/fpu_cell.png" alt="FPU" width="400" /><br/>
  <em>Figure 8: Floating Point Unit</em>
</div>

The FPU operates on data from Source A and Source B registers, storing results in the Destination register. It is architected as a matrix of FPU cells - multifunctional units that combine multipliers and adders, working with accumulators in the Destination register.
Each FPU cell supports three operations:

1. Accumulated dot product
2. Accumulated element-wise addition

> 3. Element-wise addition

Reviewer: Missing accumulated element wise multiplication. (it has bugs though)

Author: Adding it, do you think we should mention that it has bugs at this level of documentation?

- Only a subset of formats are supported during unpacking operations;
- Different components of the Tensix Core have varying format support.

## Math fidelity

The Tensix hardware can use a limited number of bits for multiplication operations. To utilize all the bits from the datums of a particular data format, several multiplication phases might be required to achieve full precision.

> [Math fidelity](https://docs.tenstorrent.com/pybuda/latest/dataformats.html) is a key concept in achieving computational accuracy. Tensix Cores support up to four fidelity phases for all data formats, allowing developers to balance accuracy requirements with performance for their specific application

Reviewer: instead of "for all data formats" -> "depending on the data format" 

as some formats wont require 4 phases.
